[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> In the beginning was
the logos, the Big Bang,
the primordial om.
Big Bang Theory says that the
physical universe spiraled out
of an unimaginably hot
and dense single point
called a singularity,
billions of times smaller
than the head of a pin.
It does not say why or how.
The more mysterious
something is,
the more we take for granted
that we understand it.
It was thought that
eventually gravity
would either slow the
expansion or contract
the universe in a big crunch.
However, images from the
Hubble Space Telescope
show that the
universe's expansion
seems to be actually
accelerating,
expanding faster and faster as
it grows out of the Big Bang.
Somehow, there is more
mass in the universe
than physics predicted.
To account for the missing
mass, physicists now
say that the universe
consists of only 4%
atomic matter, or what we
consider normal matter.
23% of the universe
is dark matter.
And 73% is dark energy,
what we previously
thought of as empty space.
It is like an invisible
nervous system
that runs through the universe,
connecting all things.
The ancient vedic teachers
taught Nada Brahma.
The universe is vibration.
The vibratory field
is at the root
of all true spiritual experience
and scientific investigation.
It is the same field of energy
that saints, buddhas, yogis,
mystics, priests,
shamans, and seers
have observed by looking
within themselves.
It has been called
Akasha, the primordial om,
Indra's Net of Jewels,
the music of the spheres,
and a thousand other
names throughout history.
It is the common
root of all religions
and the link between our inner
worlds and our outer worlds.
In Mahayana Buddhism
in the third century,
they described a cosmology
not unlike the most advanced
physics of modern day.
Indra's Net of
Jewels is a metaphor
used to describe a much
older vedic teaching, which
illustrates the way the
fabric of the universe
is woven together.
Indra, the King of the
Gods, gave birth to the sun
and moves the winds
and the waters.
Imagine a spiderweb that
extends into all dimensions.
The web is made up of
dew drops and every drop
contains the reflection of
all the other water drops.
And in each reflected
dew drop, you
will find the reflections
of all the other droplets,
the entire web in
that reflection,
and so on to infinity.
Indra's Web could be described
as a holographic universe,
where even the smallest
stream of light
contains the complete
pattern of the whole.
The Serbian-American
scientists, Nikola Tesla,
is sometimes referred
to as the man
who invented the 20th century.
Tesla was responsible
for discovering
alternating current electricity
and many other creations that
are now part of everyday life.
Because of his interest in
the ancient vedic traditions,
Tesla was in a unique position
to understand science,
through both an eastern
and western model.
Like all great scientists,
Tesla look deeply
into the mysteries
of the outer world.
But he also looked
deeply within himself.
Like the ancient yogis,
Tesla used the term Akasha
to describe the
etheric field that
extends throughout all things.
Tesla studied with
swami Vivekananda,
a yogi who brought the ancient
teachings of India to the West.
In the vedic teachings,
Akasha is space itself,
the space that the
other elements fill,
which exist simultaneously
with vibration.
The two are inseparable.
Akasha is yin to Prana's yang.
A modern concept that can
help us to conceptualize
Akasha, or the
primary substance,
is the idea of fractals.
It wasn't until the 1980s
that advances in computers
allowed us to actually
visualize and reproduce,
mathematically, the
patterns in nature.
The term fractal
was coined in 1980
by mathematician
Manuel Mandelbrot, who
studied certain simple
mathematical equations
that, when they are
repeated, produce
an unending array of changing
mathematical or geometrical
forms within a
limited framework.
They are limited, but at
the same time, infinite.
A fractal is a rough
geometric shape
that can be split into
parts, each of which
is at least approximately
a reduced size
copy of the whole
pattern, a property
called self-similarity.
Mandelbrot's fractals have being
called the Thumbprint of God.
[NON-ENGLISH SINGING]
You are seeing artwork
generated by nature itself.
If you turn the Mandelbrot
figure a certain way,
it looks sort of like a
Hindu deity or Buddha.
This figure is being
termed a Buddhabrot figure.
If you look at some forms of
ancient art and architecture,
you will see that
humans have long
associated beauty and the
sacred with fractal patterns.
Infinitely complex,
yet every part
contains the seed to
recreate the whole.
Fractals have changed
mathematicians
views of the universe
and how it operates.
With each new level
of magnification,
there are differences
from the original.
Constant change
and transformation
occurs as we traverse from
one level of fractal detail
to another.
This transformation
is the cosmic spiral,
the embedded intelligence
of the matrix of time space.
Fractals are inherently chaotic,
full of noise and order.
When our minds recognize
or define a pattern,
we focus on it, as
if it is a thing.
We try to find the patterns
we see as beautiful.
But in order to hold the
pattern in our minds,
we must push away the
rest of the fractal.
To comprehend a
fractal with a census
is to limit its movement.
All energy and the universe
is neutral, timeless,
dimensionless.
Our own creativity and capacity
for pattern recognition
is the link between the
microcosm and macrocosm,
the timeless world of waves,
and the solid world of things.
Observation is an
act of creation
through limitations
inherent in thinking.
We are creating the illusion
of solidity, of things
by labeling, by naming.
The philosopher Kierkegaard
said, "If you name me,
you negate me.
By giving me a
name, a label, you
negate all of the other
things I could possibly be.
You lock the particle
into being a thing
by pinning it down, naming it.
But at the same time,
you are creating it,
defining it to exist."
Creativity is our
highest nature.
With the creation
of things comes
time, which is what creates
the illusion of solidity.
Einstein was the first
scientist to realize
that what we think of as
empty space is not nothing.
It has properties.
And intrinsic to
the nature of space
is nearly unfathomable
amounts of energy.
The renowned physicist
Richard Feynman
once said, "There
is enough energy
in a single cubic
meter of space to boil
all the oceans in the world."
Advanced meditators know
that in the stillness
lies the greatest power.
The Buddha had yet another term
for the primary substance, what
he termed kalapas, which
are like tiny particles
or wavelets that are
rising and passing away
trillions of times per second.
Reality is, in this
sense, like a series
of frames in a
holographic film camera,
moving quickly, so as to create
the illusion of continuity.
When consciousness
becomes perfectly still,
the illusion is
understood, because it
is consciousness itself
that drives the illusion.
In the ancient
traditions of the east,
it has been understood
for thousands of years
that all is vibration, Nada
Brahma, the universe's sound.
The word Nada means
sound or vibration.
And Brahma is the name for God.
Brahma simultaneously is the
universe and is the creator.
The artist and the
art are inseparable.
In the Upanishads, one of
the oldest human records
from ancient India,
it is said Brahma
the creator, sitting on
a lotus, opens his eyes
and a world comes into being.
Brahma closes his eyes and
a world goes out of being.
Ancient mystics,
yogis, and seers
have maintained that there
is a field at the root
level of consciousness,
the Akashic field,
or the Akashic records,
where all information,
all experience, past,
present, and future,
exists now and always.
It is this field or matrix
from which all things arise,
from subatomic particles to
galaxies, stars, planets,
and all life.
You never see anything
in its totality,
because it is made up of
layer upon layer of vibration
and it is constantly changing,
exchanging information
with Akasha.
A tree is drinking in the sun,
the air, the rain, the earth.
A world of energy
moves in and out
of this thing we call a tree.
When the thinking mind is still,
then you see reality as it is,
all aspects together.
The tree and the sky and the
earth, the rain and the stars
are not separate.
Life and death, self and
other are not separate,
just as the mountain and
the valley are inseparable.
In the Native American and
other indigenous traditions,
it is said that everything
has spirit, which is simply
another way of
saying, everything
is connected to the
one vibratory source.
There is one
consciousness, one field,
one force that
moves through all.
This field is not
happening around you.
It is happening through
you and happening as you.
You are the you in universe.
You are the eyes through
which creation sees itself.
When you wake from
a dream, you realize
that everything in
the dream was you.
You were creating it.
So-called real life
is no different.
Every one, everything is you.
The one consciousness
looking out
of every eye, under every
rock, within every particle.
International
researchers at CERN,
the European laboratory
for particle physics,
are searching for
this field that
extends throughout all things.
But instead of
looking within, they
look to the outer
physical world.
Researchers at the
CERN Laboratory
in Geneva, Switzerland announced
that they had found the Higgs
boson, or the God Particle.
The Higgs Boson experiments
proved, scientifically,
that an invisible energy field
fills the vacuum of space.
CERN's Large Hadron Collider
consists of a ring 17 miles
in circumference,
in which two beams
of particles race in
opposite directions,
converging and smashing together
at nearly the speed of light.
Scientists observe what comes
out of the violent collisions.
The standard model cannot
account for how particles get
their mass.
Everything appears to
be made of vibration,
but there is no
thing being vibrated.
It is as if there has been an
invisible dancer, a shadow,
dancing hidden in the
ballet of the universe.
All the other
dancers have always
danced around this
hidden dancer.
We have observed the
choreography of the dance.
But until now, we could
not see that dancer.
The so-called God
Particle, the properties
of the base material
of universe,
the heart of all matter,
which would account
for the unexplained mass
and energy that drives
the universe's expansion.
But far from explaining
the nature of the universe,
the discovery of the
Higgs boson simply
presents an even
greater mystery,
revealing a universe that is
more mysterious than we ever
imagined.
Science is approaching the
threshold between consciousness
and matter.
The eye with which we look
at the primordial field
and the eye with which
the field looks at us
are one and the same.
The German writer and
luminary Wolfgang Von Goethe
said, "The wave is the
primordial phenomenon
which gave rise to the world."
Cymatics is the study
of visible sound.
The word cymatics comes
from the Greek root cyma,
which means wave or vibration.
One of the first
Western scientists
to seriously study
wave phenomena
was Ernst Chladni, a German
musician and physicist
who lived in the 18th century.
Chladni discovered that when
he spread sand on metal plates
and then vibrated the
plates with a violin bow,
the sand arranged
itself into patterns.
Different geometrical
forms appeared, depending
on the vibration produced.
Chladni recorded an entire
catalog of these shapes
and they are referred
to as Chladni figures.
Many of these
patterns can be found
throughout the natural
world, such as the markings
of the tortoise or the
spot patterns of a leopard.
Studying Chladni patterns,
or cymatic patterns,
is one secret way in which
high end guitar, violin,
and other instrument makers
determine the sound qualities
of the instruments they make.
Hans Jenny expanded on
Chladni's work in the 1960s,
using various fluids and
electronic amplification
to generate sound frequencies
and coined the term cymatics.
If you run simple sine waves
through a dish of water,
you can see patterns
in the water.
Depending on the
frequency of the wave,
different ripple
patterns will appear.
The higher the frequency,
the more complex the pattern.
These forms are
repeatable, not random.
The more you
observe, the more you
start to see how
vibration arranges matter
into complex forms from
simple repeating waves.
This water vibration has a
pattern similar to a sunflower.
Simply by changing
the sound frequency,
we get a different pattern.
Water is a very
mysterious substance.
It is highly
impressionable, that is
it can receive and
hold onto vibration.
Because of its high resonance
capacity and sensitivity
and an inner
readiness to resonate,
the water responds
instantaneously
to all types of sonic waves.
Vibrating water and earth
make up the majority of mass
in plants and animals.
It is easy to observe how
simple vibrations in water
can create recognizable,
natural patterns.
But as we add solids and
increase the amplitude,
things get even
more interesting.
Adding cornstarch to water,
we get more complex phenomena.
Perhaps the principles
of life itself
can be observed as vibrations
move the cornstarch
blob into what appears
to be a moving organism.
The animating principle
of the universe
is described in
every major religion,
using words that reflect
the understanding
of that time in history.
In the language of the
Incas, the largest empire
in pre-Colombian America,
the word for human body
is alpa camasca, which means
literally, animated earth.
In Kabbalah, or
Jewish mysticism,
they talk about the
divine name of God,
the name that cannot be spoken.
It cannot be spoken, because
it is a vibration that is
everywhere.
It is all words, all matter.
Everything is the secret word.
The tetrahedron is the
simplest shape that
can exist in three dimensions.
Something must have
at least four points
to have physical reality.
The triangle
structure is nature's
only self-stabilizing pattern.
In the Old Testament,
the word tetragrammaton
was often used to represent a
certain manifestation of God.
It was used when talking
about the word of God
or the special name of God,
logos or primordial word.
The ancient
civilizations knew that
at the root structure
of the universe
was the tetrahedral shape.
Out of this shape, nature
exhibits a fundamental drive
toward equilibrium,
Shiva, while it also
has a fundamental drive
towards change, Shakti.
In the Bible, the Gospel
of John usually reads,
"In the beginning was THE WORD."
But in the original text
, the term used was logos.
The Greek philosopher,
Heraclitus,
who lived around 500
years before Christ,
referred to the logos as
something fundamentally
unknowable, the origin of all
repetition, pattern, and form.
The stoic philosophers
who followed
the teachings of Heraclitus
identified the term
with the divine
animating principle
pervading the universe.
In Sufism, the logos is
everywhere and in all things.
It is that out of which the
unmanifest becomes manifest.
In the Hindu tradition,
Shiva Nataraja literally
means Lord of the Dance.
The whole cosmos
dances to Shiva's drum.
All is imbued, or insoled,
with the pulsation.
Only as long as Shiva
is dancing can the world
continue to evolve and change.
Otherwise, it collapses
back into nothingness.
While Shiva is representative
of our witnessing consciousness,
Shakti is the substance,
or stuff, of the world.
While Shiva lies in meditation,
Shakti he tries to move him,
to bring him into the dance.
Like yin and yang, the dancer
and the dance exist as one.
Logos also means
unconcealed truth.
He who knows the
logos, knows the truth.
Many layers of concealment
exist in the human world,
as Akasha has been swirled
into complex structures,
concealing the
source from itself.
Like a divine game
of hide and seek,
we have been hiding
for thousands of years,
eventually forgetting
about the game completely.
We somehow forgot that
there was anything to find.
In Buddhism, one is taught
to directly perceive
the logos, the field of
change or impermanence
within oneself
through meditation.
When you observe
your inner world,
you observe subtler and
subtler sensations and energies
as the mind becomes more
concentrated and focused.
Through the direct realization
of Anicha, or impermanence,
at the root level of sensation,
one becomes free of attachment
to transient external forms.
Once we realize there is
one vibratory field that
is the common root
of all religions,
how can we say my religion
or this is my primordial om,
my quantum field?
The true crisis in our world
is not social, political,
or economic.
Our crisis is a crisis of
consciousness and inability
to directly experience our
true nature, an inability
to recognize this nature in
everyone and in all things.
In the Buddhist
tradition, the bodhisattva
is a person with an
awakened Buddha nature.
A bodhisattva vows
to help to awaken
every being in the universe,
realizing that there
is only one consciousness.
To awaken one's true self,
one must awaken all beings.
There are innumerable sentient
beings in the universe.
I vow to help them
all to awaken.
My imperfections
are inexhaustible.
I vow to overcome them all.
The Dharma is unknowable.
I vow to know it.
The way of awakening
is unattainable.
I vow to attain it.